now in the second year of
Nebuchadnezzar's reign Nebuchadnezzar
had dreams and his spirit was so
troubled that his sleep left him then
the King gave the command to call the
magician's the astrologers the sorcerers
and the Chaldeans to tell the King his
dreams so they came and stood before the
king I have had a dream and my spirit is
anxious to know the dream
been the Chaldeans spoke to the King in
Aramaic all King live forever
tell your servants the dream and we will
give the interpretation my decision is
firm if you do not make known the dream
to me and its interpretation you shall
be cut in pieces and your houses shall
be made and a sheep however if you tell
the dream and its interpretation you
shall receive from me gifts rewards and
great honor therefore tell me the dream
and its interpretation let the King tell
his servants the dream and we will give
its interpretation I know for certain
that you would gain time
because you see that my decision is firm
if you do not make known the dream to me
there is only one decree for you for you
have agreed to speak lying and corrupt
words before me till the time has
changed therefore tell me the dream and
I shall know that you can give me its
interpretation there is not a man on
earth who can tell the Kings matter
therefore no King Lord or ruler has ever
asked such things of any magician
astrologer or Chaldean it is a difficult
thing that the King requests and there
is no other who can tell it to the king
except the gods whose dwelling is not
with flesh for this reason the king was
angry and very furious and gave the
command to destroy all the wise men of
Babylon
so the decree went out and they began
killing the wise man and they sought
Daniel and his companions to kill them
then with counsel and wisdom Daniel
answered area the captain of the
Kingsguard who had gone out to kill the
wise men of Babylon the answered and
said to area the King's captain why is
the decree from the King so urgent then
Arioch made the decision known to Daniel
so Daniel went in and asked the King to
give him time that he might tell the
king the interpretation then Daniel went
to his house and made the decision known
to Hananiah Mishael and Azariah his
companions that they might seek mercies
from the God of heaven concerning this
secret so that Daniel and his companions
might not perish with the rest of the
wise men of Babylon
then the secret was revealed to Daniel
in a night vision so Daniel bless the
God of heaven blessed be the name of God
forever and ever for wisdom and might
are his and he changes the times in the
seasons he removes kings and raises up
kings he gives wisdom to the wise and
knowledge to those who have
understanding he reveals deep and secret
things he knows what is in the darkness
and light dwells with him I thank you
and praise you O God of my father's you
have given me wisdom and might and have
now made known to me what we asked of
you if you have made known to us the
King's demand therefore Daniel went to
Arioch whom the King had appointed to
destroy the wise men of Babylon he went
and said thus to him do not destroy the
wise men of Babylon take me before the
king and I will tell the king the
interpretation then area quickly brought
Daniel before the king I have found a
man of the captives of Judah who will
make known to the king the
interpretation the King answered and
said to Daniel whose name was
belteshazzar are you able to make known
to me the dream which I have seen and
its interpretation the secret which the
king is demanded the wise men the
astrologers the magicians and the
soothsayers cannot declare to the king
but there is a God in heaven who reveals
secrets and he has made known to King
Nebuchadnezzar what will be in the
latter days
your dream in the visions of your head
upon your bed or these as for you O king
thoughts came to your mind while on your
bed about what would come to pass after
this
and he who reveals secrets has made
known to you what will be but as for me
this secret has not been revealed to me
because I have more wisdom than anyone
living but for our sakes who make
knowing the interpretation to the king
and that you may know the thoughts of
your heart you O king were watching and
behold a great image this great image
whose splendor was excellent stood
before you and its form was awesome this
images head was a fine gold its chest
and arms of silver its belly and thighs
of bronze its legs of iron its feet
partly of iron and partly of clay you
watched while the stone was cut out
without hands which struck the image on
its feet of iron and clay and broke them
in pieces then the iron the clay the
bronze the silver and the gold were
crushed together and became like chaff
from the summer threshing floors the
wind carried them away so that no trace
of them was found and the stone that
struck the image became a great mountain
and filled the whole earth this is the
dream now we will tell the
interpretation of it before the king you
O king or a king of kings
for the God of heaven has given you a
kingdom power strength and glory and
wherever the children of men dwell or
the beasts of the field and the birds of
the heaven he has given them into your
hand and has made you ruler over them
all you are this head of gold but after
you shall arise another Kingdom inferior
to yours than another a third kingdom of
brass which shall rule over all the
earth and the fourth Kingdom shall be as
strong as iron in as much as iron breaks
in pieces and shatters everything and
like iron that crushes that Kingdom will
break in pieces and crush all the others
whereas you saw the feet and toes partly
of potters clay and partly of iron the
kingdom shall be divided yet the
strength of the iron shall be in it just
as you saw the iron mixed with ceramic
clay and as the toes of the feet were
partly of iron and partly of clay so the
kingdom shall be partly strong and
partly fragile as you saw iron mixed
with ceramic clay they will mingle with
the seed of men but they will not adhere
to one another just as iron does not mix
with clay and in the days of these Kings
the God of heaven will set up a kingdom
which shall never be destroyed and the
Kingdom shall not be left to other
people it shall break in pieces and
consume all these kingdoms and it shall
stand for ever and as much as you saw
that the stone was cut out of the
mountain without hands and that it broke
in pieces the iron the bronze the clay
the silver and the gold the great God
has made known to the king what will
come to pass after this the dream is
certain and its interpretation is sure
when king nebuchadnezzar fell on his
face prostrate before daniel and
commanded that they should present an
offering and incense to him truly your
god is the god of gods the lord of kings
in a revealer of Secrets since you could
reveal this secret then the king
promoted daniel and gave him many great
gifts and he made him ruler over the
whole province of Babylon and chief
administrator over all the wise men of
Babylon also Daniel petitioned the king
and he said Shadrach Meshach and
Abednego over the affairs of the
province of Babylon
but Daniel sat in the gate of the king
[Music]
you